Good day, everyone. I'm Norman Wildberger.
In today's video, I want to do something a
little bit different. I want to go back to a paper
that I wrote fifteen years ago called Real Fish,
Real Numbers, Real Jobs, where I tried to
start convincing my fellow mathematicians
that there was something unsatisfactory about our
approach to real numbers. This article appeared in
The Mathematical Intelligencer, which is a very
prominent expository journal that covers a wide
range of mathematics for a very broad audience.
The actual issue was Volume 21, Number 2, in 1999.
The paper is not that long, and I'm going to
inflict it upon you—I'm going to read it to
you today. I hope you'll enjoy it because it's
written in a somewhat tongue-in-cheek fashion,
a little bit more lighthearted perhaps
than my current approach to real numbers,
which is a little bit more forceful
and take-no-prisoners. And maybe we'll
talk about that after I read the paper to you.
Real Fish, Real Numbers, Real Jobs
There are good times ahead for biologists.
The electronics revolution will plateau in
the early decades of the new millennium,
and quantum computing, gene manipulation, and pet
cloning will kick in. We'll see bumper crops of
biology graduates pouring into expanded university
departments, research institutes, and biotech
companies. Some decades later, however, with
hemoglobin-monitoring wristwatches and desktop
chicken mutators as plentiful and as much of a
nuisance as mobile phones and laptops are now,
the spotlight of public attention and funds
will inevitably shift to consumer applications.
Where will that leave the ranks of theoretical
research biologists amassed by universities?
My advice is to think now about saving the job
prospects of future generations of academics by
reconsidering and expanding the entire subject.
That's where I humbly suggest toaster fish come
in, and where mathematicians can provide some
friendly help. A toaster fish is, of course,
a creature with the head of a toaster—the
pop-up kind—and the body of a fish. Thus,
Figure 1 shows a typical toaster fish. And here
is Figure 1. I hope you can see that down there,
an artist's representation of a toaster fish.
Toaster fish come in at least two different
varieties: the North American kind,
which operates on 120 volts, and the European
kind, which uses 220 volts. Already, I hear a
lot of you asking the obvious question: Can North
American and European toaster fish mate? This is
typical of the important new research problems
in the brave new world of biology I'm proposing.
Biology needs to embrace the study of life in all
its possibilities. There is no need to restrict
attention to those creatures actually living or
having lived or with the potential of living on
planet Earth and its immediate environs. These
creatures are but a happy cross-section of all
possible life forms. By widening our consideration
to arbitrary creatures, we can formulate new
theories, create intellectual challenges, unleash
our wildest imagination, and, best of all,
create jobs. Let's call this emerging field "Life
Theory." Toaster fish, baby universes, and slimy
galactic super-octopi will all be embraced
by this farsighted new intellectual endeavor.
But it won't be easy. There'll be colleagues who
ridicule life theory—those who call it a theory
about nothing or quasi-religious speculation
on things that don't exist. Already, one of my
friends protests that Figure 1 amounts to little
more than a poetic idea since I have not specified
the internal workings of the toaster fish
depicted. Fortunately, mathematicians have already
encountered and triumphed over similar obstacles
in their historic struggle to place real numbers
squarely at the center of all modern mathematical
discourse. The modern biologist can gain from a
careful study of this important achievement, which
we turn to now with an eye to the main principles.
A Short History of Numbers and
the Importance of Terminology
The Neanderthals gave us one, two, and
three. The ancients added on four, five,
six, and so on, discovered zero and negative
numbers, and employed rationals like 22/3.
They discovered that other useful
quantities like √2 and π were not
of this form and could only be specified
by algorithms, which subsequently allowed
writing them in binary expansions like
√2 = 1.0110101... and π = 11.0010010....
The Europeans added some more useful numbers:
complex numbers like 5 + 2i and infinitesimals
like 1 + 3dx. It wasn't clear exactly what these
numbers were, but their use in the calculus was
undisputed, so they remained—until the 19th
century, that is, when new standards of rigor
revealed that an infinitely small quantity was
only a grammatical construction bereft of any
real mathematical meaning. So infinitesimals were
abandoned, but complex numbers were justified, and
constructible irrationals abounded. So we still
had numbers galore for every conceivable problem.
Then came the greatest, the boldest leap of
all: we introduced numbers so abstract that
they couldn't possibly be needed for any concrete
problem. How? We considered binary expansions that
couldn't be constructed by definition.
Although this may sound contradictory,
it is not. Just consider a slimy galactic
super-octopus with an infinitely large brain,
an infinite number of arms, and
an inclination to wave them all
simultaneously and independently either
up or down. Looking at the configuration
of arms at some random time gives a
generally unconstructible sequence.
As an aside, I mention that such a
creature would be a useful friend,
being able to solve the Goldbach conjecture or
the Riemann hypothesis simply by computation—and
in an infinitesimally small amount of time to
boot! More mundanely, an uncomputable binary
expansion is simply a binary expansion that is
not computable. It does seem curious that such
a simple idea eluded all the great thinkers
until the latter half of the 19th century.
To envision such a number, we proceed
as follows: randomly write down a
string of zeros and ones—a dozen usually
suffices, but if the audience is skeptical,
I like to include more—and then add three
dots. Thus, α = 1.0110101111001... shows a
typical unconstructible number. These new
objects, when added onto the collection
of rationals and constructible irrationals, gave
us a whole new domain of mathematical discourse.
Now, a key point: What did we
call this new number system,
consisting largely of numerical creations of
our imagination? Did we call them arbitrary
numbers or way-out numbers? No. In a flash of
brilliance any PR person would be proud of,
we called them real numbers and designated them by
the solid-looking ℝ. This inspired terminology is
worth emulating. I suggest you call the new area
of modern biology concerned with toaster fish,
refrigerator fish, and so on the field
of "Real Fish." Those real fish actually
found in the solar system will then have a
special designation, subtly reinforcing the
idea that it is unnatural to consider them
separately—let's say "Observable Real Fish."
How much more of a bother it is to consider
the latter! Let α be an observable real fish.
You begin your lecture—where is it from? Is it
green? What does it eat? Someone immediately
asks. Therefore, preferable: Let α be a real
fish. This protects you from such unnecessary
questions, which you can't answer anyway.
In mathematics, restriction to computable
real numbers is a decided nuisance. First,
one must worry about what computable means:
which machine, which language? About
whether or not programs halt? Simple
operations like adding or multiplying two
numbers give us headaches. Real numbers
free us from these hassles, which we prefer
to leave to the computer scientists anyway.
Training the Young
How do we get future generations
to take the validity of real numbers for granted?
We indoctrinate them early in their careers when
they are eager but impressionable undergraduates.
Here's how we do it: First, we soften them up
with a "constructing the real numbers" blurb in
their first calculus course. Needless to say,
we don't really construct real numbers, as they
are by definition unconstructible, but the phrase
sticks in their minds long after the details are
forgotten. Sometime later, we expose them to the
definition of a one-to-one correspondence,
Cantor's wonderful proof that there is no
list of all binary sequences, and voila! There's
a bit of hand-waving about what a set actually
is, and a vast and glittering new universe of
ordinals, cardinals, hierarchies of infinities,
and continuum hypotheses opens up before their
eyes. The confusion and apprehension of millennia
cast aside, our students are soon fearlessly
manipulating arbitrary unions of arbitrarily
many powers of uncountable ordinals. It's a heady
experience, this first grasping hold of infinity.
But be warned: There will be some students who
won't buy this. After all, young people are a
tad critical at this age. We explain to them that
if they want to get into foundational questions,
then they had better first master the
predicate calculus of first-order logic.
Having barely mastered the ordinary calculus,
they seem to find this a convincing argument.
A further point: We don't start with younger
students, since they get too easily confused.
They want to know specifics like, how does
one add or multiply real numbers? In fact,
one can't add or multiply real numbers. But of
course, this shouldn't and doesn't prevent us
from using these operations on a daily basis.
Immature learners are likely to get stuck by
these subtleties. The snag is the following:
Suppose we want to add the unconstructible real
numbers 1.01010101001... and 1.1000100111001....
Clearly, the first digits of the sum are 10.11,
but the next digit requires more information.
How much more information? Possibly just one
more digit, possibly a trillion more digits,
and here's the rub—possibly infinitely many
more digits. The complementary pattern of zeros
and ones might continue to infinity, but if so,
we'll never know it. This prevents us from ever
specifying a procedure to add real numbers.
One might hope that trying some different
definition of the reals, using continued
fractions or Dedekind cuts or Cauchy sequences of
rationals, might solve the problem—but it doesn't.
It just transforms it into an equivalent one. But
here's where religion—or modern biology—comes to
our aid. It may be impossible for us to know
whether a given complementary pattern of zeros
and ones continues indefinitely, but it is clearly
not impossible for God or a slimy intergalactic
super-octopus to know. So we are blessedly free to
go on talking about adding arbitrary real numbers.
Convincing the Professorial
This is a question primarily of
critical mass. Once enough of the academy accepts
and profits by the new bounds of the discipline,
a critical momentum will prevent opponents
from stemming the tide. First of all,
a leading luminary must be taken on board. In our
case, that was David Hilbert, whose oft-quoted
"No one shall expel us from the paradise that
Cantor has created for us" becomes our motto.
Furthermore, we must convince our colleagues
that opportunities for research are rife. In
mathematics, the kind of free thinking
that allows the pleasant contemplation
of real numbers—I like to think of them
as basking in the sun—also revels in more
complicated abstractions. Unlike earlier, more
squeamish generations, we are quite comfortable
with arbitrary functions from ℝ to ℝ—not just
those given by formulas or computer programs,
but all the others too. With arbitrary
operators on spaces of such functions,
with arbitrary functionals on algebras of such
operators, and so on. Non-measurable functions,
Banach-Tarski paradoxes, various versions of
the axiom of choice, inaccessible cardinals—none
of these ruffles our calm in the brave
new world of 20th-century mathematics.
More than just jobs are opened up here, though.
Our easy attitude to sets can be extended to
other mathematical objects too. This liberal
approach is captured by what we might call
the Axiom of Freedom: An object is constructed
or specified—same thing—by simply stating it.
To give it one of a multitude of possible
uses of this principle: Suppose you finally
constructed a quasi-barreled inverted amorphous
fiber scheme S, and that all that remains is to
exhibit the space P of all coherent quadratic
forms from S to its dual. In years gone by,
this would have required fretting about precise
definitions and concrete realizations. These days,
you need only say, "Let P be the space of
all coherent quadratic functions from S
to its dual." Voila, the construction is complete.
Setbacks and Recovery
At the turn of the century,
with mathematicians divided in controversy over
the validity and meaning of Cantor's new theory
and the role of real numbers, disaster
struck. In one of the most embarrassing
intellectual deflations of all time, the entire
new theory came crashing down with the discovery
of fundamental new paradoxes. These weren't just
the niggling kind of inconsistencies acknowledged
from the start even by Cantor—they were the
full-blown π = √2 type of contradictions that
ruin one's entire week. A dark time indeed,
but ultimately only a minor setback. After
some hesitant and unconvincing attempts to
shore up the subject, we now see that worrying
about such issues is largely a waste of time.
Foundations are not really all that necessary.
If pressed by philosophical types, we have a
fallback position: mathematics is based on axioms,
and the axioms for set theory were spelled out
by Zermelo and Fraenkel. This is the foremost
position, also pushed by Hilbert, which got rather
badly bruised by Gödel's results in the 1930s. As
a result, most of us closeted Platonists aren't
so keen on this official explanation. But who
really wants to get embroiled in philosophical
hair-splittings? An intellectual discipline
reflects the spirit and the values of the times,
and these are times of pragmatism and expediency.
If pressed by our own kind—by mathematicians who
try to point out the imprecision of our cherished
fundamental concepts—we respond politely,
we allow them their say, listen patiently,
and point out that they're basically only
repeating Brouwer's critique of 1918.
And what about those who obstinately
refuse to understand, who keep on
insisting that you explain what exactly is a
real fish? Sigh. These people are quibblers,
philosophical quibblers at that, and they are
best ignored. After all, you've got a job to do.
Looking to the Future
As pragmatism and expediency
don't look to be departing the modern world
anytime soon, I'm confident that the lessons
mathematicians have learned can be fruitfully
applied to biology. Don't expect to convince
your contemporaries about the importance
of real fish. Recruit a few top names,
work on the future generations, keep
the employment prospects firmly in view,
and life theory will take its rightful
place in the scientific world.
As for me, this little advice-giving has got
me thinking. Mathematicians are themselves a
bit hard-pressed these days for employment. The
huge amount of time and effort required to rewrite
modern mathematics using only computable numbers,
computable functions, computable everything would
keep us busy for decades. Unpleasant, a lot of
hard work that would be, but hard work means jobs,
grants, and pensions. Maybe Aristotle, Archimedes,
Newton, Euler, Gauss, Kronecker, Borel, Lebesgue,
Poincaré, Weyl, Brouwer, and the others were
right—there is something fishy about real numbers.
Alright, so that's my little article
called Real Fish, Real Numbers,
Real Jobs, which I published in 1999 in
The Mathematical Intelligencer. So you
might want to know what kind of response
I've gotten. How many dozen citations has
this lovely and illuminating paper received?
It's received, as far as I know, one citation,
and I have gotten correspondence from, I think,
one or two people concerning it. I once had
a roommate at a conference in New Zealand from
Belgium, and we were talking about real numbers,
and it turned out that he had read an article some
time back about somebody who was also adopting a
heretical position. It turned out to
be my article, so I was a little bit
amused by that—that at least people have read the
article and maybe not responded directly to it.
But the point is that a single voice is easily
ignored. People have a lot of incentive to keep
on thinking the same way, to keep on going
in the same direction that they used to,
which is comfortable and pleasant, and
they, of course, are buttressed by the
support of a lot of like-thinking colleagues.
It's not so easy to change the direction of
mathematics. And what I'm going to talk about
in my next video is I'm going to address this
issue of what mathematics would actually
look like if we did seriously contemplate
getting rid of real numbers. What would
happen? Would it all just collapse? What
would mathematics look like without real
numbers? I hope you'll join me for that.
I'm Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.